:orphan:

=======================================================
Secure Your Spot for the Online 2025 DIPY Workshop!
=======================================================

:date: 2025-03-03
:author: Eleftherios Garyfallidis
:category: Workshop

Dear All,

The 2025 DIPY Workshop is fast approaching! We are excited to offer a unique opportunity for you to join us online from **March 17 to March 21, 2025**. 

This year’s workshop features an in-depth focus on AI applications in advanced imaging, alongside hands-on sessions with the latest tools and techniques for diffusion and structural MRI analysis.

Keynote Speakers
================
* **Prof. Simon Warfield** (Harvard Medical School)
* **Prof. Alexandra Badea** (Duke University)
* **Prof. Franco Pestilli** (University of Texas at Austin)
* **Prof. Marco Palombo** (Cardiff University)
* **Prof. Julien Cohen-Adad** (Polytechnique Montréal)
* **Prof. Aris Sotiras** (Washington University)
* **Dr. Maeliss Jallais** (Cardiff University)

What You’ll Gain
================
* **Ultra-fast Tracking APIs:** A deep dive into our new tracking APIs (CPU & GPU).
* **Cutting-edge Presentations:** Harmonization, Denoising, Reconstruction, and Tractography.
* **Hands-on Training:** Guided sessions working through real-world challenges.
* **Certification:** Receive a Certificate of Attendance.

Registration
============
Click here to `Register Now <http://workshop.dipy.org>`_ and secure your spot!

*Special international discounts are available for participants from regions where the USD conversion rate is a barrier. Please reach out to workshop@dipy.org for details.*