Eighth Coding Week: The Final Coding Week!
==========================================

.. post:: July 20 2026
    :author: Tomas Guija-Valiente
    :tags: google
    :category: gsoc

Hello everyone, one last time!

This was the eighth and final coding week of my GSoC project with
`DIPY <https://github.com/dipy/dipy>`_.

Most of the main implementations had already been completed, so, as in the
previous week, my work focused on polishing the remaining contributions,
addressing review comments, improving tests and documentation, and discussing
some final design decisions with my mentors.

Alongside the coding work, I started preparing the final report for my project.
It brings together the main implementations, experiments, results, and lessons
from the summer. The report is already publicly available here:

- `A Summer of Scientific Software: My GSoC Journey with DIPY
  <https://tomasguija.github.io/gsoc-2026-dipy/>`_

It will also be published through the DIPY website once it is complete.

Contributions Summary
---------------------

During my GSoC project, I opened ten pull requests covering registration
metrics, performance improvements, bug fixes, documentation, and SynthSeg
utilities. The following table summarizes these contributions:

.. list-table:: Summary of my GSoC contributions.
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 12 58 30

   * - PR
     - Contribution
     - Area
   * - `#4047 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4047>`_
     - Update the ``CCMetric`` energy after the backward step
     - Registration fix
   * - `#4052 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4052>`_
     - Remove holes and disconnected islands from SynthSeg masks
     - SynthSeg
   * - `#4067 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4067>`_
     - Add Mutual Information to SyN registration
     - Deformable registration
   * - `#4071 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4071>`_
     - Remove a redundant Parzen spline-bin evaluation
     - Registration performance
   * - `#4073 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4073>`_
     - Parallelize displacement-field composition and fixed-point inversion
     - SyN performance
   * - `#4078 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4078>`_
     - Add local cross-correlation to affine registration
     - Affine registration
   * - `#4080 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4080>`_
     - Support flexible SynthSeg input dimensions
     - SynthSeg
   * - `#4083 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4083>`_
     - Parallelize 2D and 3D image-warping operations
     - SyN performance
   * - `#4085 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4085>`_
     - Clarify 2D support in the Parzen-histogram docstrings
     - Documentation
   * - `#4086 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4086>`_
     - Clarify the return values of ``MutualInformationMetric``
     - Documentation

Final Thoughts
--------------

With the coding period coming to an end, it feels like the right moment to look
back at everything these last months have taught me.

This project showed me that implementing an idea is only one part of contributing
to scientific software. In many cases, the most difficult and valuable work
comes afterwards: simplifying the implementation, testing unusual cases,
documenting decisions, discussing APIs, responding to reviews, and making sure
that every change fits naturally into a large and established codebase.

GSoC has been my first real experience contributing to open-source software, and
it has completely changed how I see this kind of work. I came into the program
hoping to implement a project and learn from the process, but I leave it wanting
to keep contributing, collaborating, and improving software that can be useful
to others.

Although the official coding period is coming to an end, this does not really
feel like an ending. I still plan to support the pull requests that remain under
review, stay involved with DIPY, and continue participating in the wider
open-source community.

In that sense, the end of GSoC feels much more like the beginning of a longer
journey—one that I am very excited to continue.

I am very grateful to my mentors,
`Serge Koudoro <https://sergekoudoro.com/>`_,
`Atharva Shah <https://atharva-shah-2298.github.io/>`_, and
`Jong Sung Park <https://pjsjongsung.github.io/>`_, for their guidance,
patience, thoughtful reviews, and trust throughout the project, and for making
me feel welcome from the very beginning.

Find Me Online
--------------

- Final report: `A Summer of Scientific Software
  <https://tomasguija.github.io/gsoc-2026-dipy/>`_
- GitHub: `TomasGuija <https://github.com/TomasGuija>`_
- LinkedIn: `Tomás Guija-Valiente
  <https://www.linkedin.com/in/tom%C3%A1s-guija-valiente-155180260/>`_

Thank you for following my work throughout the summer, and thank you for
reading!