Seventh Coding Week: Cleaning Up Near the Finish Line!
======================================================

.. post:: July 13 2026
    :author: Tomas Guija-Valiente
    :tags: google
    :category: gsoc

Hey there!

This was the seventh coding week of my GSoC project with
`DIPY <https://github.com/dipy/dipy>`_. This week's work was less exploratory
and research-focused than during previous weeks, but it was still very
important. As the project moves closer to its final stages, I focused on
cleaning up implementations, improving tests, addressing review feedback, and
preparing the remaining pull requests for review.

The main contributions were:

- Finalizing the Mutual Information implementation for SyN registration and
  marking the PR as ready for review.
- Opening a new PR to parallelize DIPY's 2D and 3D image-warping operations.
- Cleaning up the affine cross-correlation implementation.
- Refining two SynthSeg PRs related to flexible input sizes and brain-mask
  postprocessing.
- Getting the first performance-related contribution of my GSoC project merged
  into DIPY.

First Performance Contribution Merged
-------------------------------------

The week started with some good news: my small Parzen-window optimization,
`PR #4071 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4071>`_, was merged into DIPY's
``master`` branch.

As described in my previous GSoC post, the PR removes a redundant cubic
B-spline bin evaluation from DIPY's Parzen-window Mutual Information
implementation.

This was the first PR from my GSoC performance work to be merged, so it was a
great way to begin the week!

Parallelizing Image Warping
---------------------------

I also continued the performance work started in
`PR #4073 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4073>`_, which parallelizes
displacement-field composition and fixed-point inversion in DIPY's registration
backend.

After reviewing the 2018
`OpenMP PR #1613 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/1613>`_, I identified image
warping as another important operation that could benefit from threading. SyN
repeatedly warps the static and moving images into a common reference space, so
these operations form another relevant part of the registration runtime.

I therefore opened
`PR #4083 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4083>`_, developed in the
`speed-syn-warp <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/speed-syn-warp>`_
branch.

The PR adds OpenMP parallelization to DIPY's low-level 2D and 3D image-warping
functions, covering both linear and nearest-neighbor interpolation.

The outer rows in 2D and slices in 3D can be processed independently, allowing
the loops to be parallelized using Cython's ``prange``.

The PR also propagates the existing ``num_threads`` configuration through
``DiffeomorphicMap.transform()``, ``transform_inverse()``, and the image warps
performed internally during SyN registration.

I also ran a small timing experiment on 3D SyN:

.. list-table:: SyN runtime comparison after threading the warping operations.
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Revision and mode
     - Time
     - NCC
   * - DIPY branch, one thread
     - 101.249 s
     - 0.95741
   * - DIPY branch, four threads
     - 76.864 s
     - 0.95741
   * - DIPY ``master``
     - 110.465 s
     - 0.95741

Using four threads reduced runtime while preserving the final NCC.

Reviewing and Updating Existing Pull Requests
---------------------------------------------

This week, I also had a meeting with my mentors to review the current state of
the open pull requests and identify the main changes needed before they can be
merged.

Following this review, I focused on updating and cleaning several existing
contributions:

- `PR #4067 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4067>`_, adding Mutual
  Information for SyN registration.
- `PR #4078 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4078>`_, adding
  cross-correlation to affine registration.
- `PR #4052 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4052>`_, improving the brain mask
  returned by SynthSeg.
- `PR #4080 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4080>`_, supporting flexible
  SynthSeg input sizes.

The changes mainly involved simplifying implementations, improving dtype and
input validation, refining APIs and documentation, extending test coverage, and
addressing specific reviewer feedback. Some of these PRs are now ready for
review, while the remaining ones continue to be updated based on the discussion.

Next Week's Work
----------------

For next week, I plan to focus on bringing the remaining open pull requests to
completion by addressing the latest review comments, polishing the
implementations, and making sure that the tests and documentation are ready.

I will also begin writing the final GSoC report, summarizing the work completed
during the project, the main results, and the current status of each
contribution.

Find Me Online
--------------

- GitHub: `TomasGuija <https://github.com/TomasGuija>`_
- LinkedIn: `Tomás Guija Valiente <https://www.linkedin.com/in/tom%C3%A1s-guija-valiente-155180260/>`_

Thank you for reading!
