Fifth Coding Week: First MI Implementation PR
=================================================

.. post:: June 29 2026
    :author: Tomas Guija-Valiente
    :tags: google
    :category: gsoc

Hello everyone!

This was the fifth coding week of my GSoC project with
`DIPY <https://github.com/dipy/dipy>`_, and the work focused on moving the
Mutual Information (MI) implementation closer to a usable pull request while also
expanding the registration benchmarks. In particular, this week's work focused
on:

- Opening a draft pull request with a working MI implementation for SyN
  registration.
- Merging the MI implementation branch with the registration benchmarking branch
  to create a combined branch for MI benchmarking experiments.
- Running new benchmarking experiments with the MI implementation and further
  comparing DIPY against `ANTs <https://github.com/ANTsX/ANTsPy>`_.
- Measuring and comparing the average runtime of DIPY and ANTs under the same
  benchmark setup.


New MI PR
----------

This week I reorganized the MI implementation work into a cleaner branch and
opened a draft pull request. The previous implementation was developed in the
`double-loop-MI <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/double-loop-MI>`_
branch. Starting from that work, I created the
`single-loop-MI <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/single-loop-MI>`_
branch and opened
`draft PR #4067 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4067>`_ in DIPY.

The goal of this branch is to provide a clearer and more efficient
implementation of MI as a SyN-compatible similarity metric. The earlier
``double-loop-MI`` version was useful as an initial prototype, but it followed a
more direct structure in which the dense MI derivative computation was split into
separate stages. This made the implementation easier to develop and debug, but
it was not ideal as a final version.

In the new ``single-loop-MI`` branch, the dense MI update computation was
reorganized so that the relevant local-support information is computed in a
tighter path. The implementation now builds the joint intensity statistics and
stores the local derivative contributions needed for the dense displacement
update, which are later combined with the MI weights. This removes the initial
prototype structure and makes the code closer to what should eventually be
merged.

The branch also adds a new ``MIMetric`` class in ``metrics.py``, exposing Mutual
Information through the same interface used by the existing SyN metrics such as
``CCMetric``, ``SSDMetric``, and ``EMMetric``. This allows MI to be used directly
with ``SymmetricDiffeomorphicRegistration``.

LPBA40 Benchmark
----------------

I prepared a new monomodal inter-patient benchmark using `LPBA40 <https://resource.loni.usc.edu/resources/atlases-downloads/>`_ dataset. The dataset was
downloaded in its original format, with paired ``.hdr`` and ``.img`` files for
each subject. I converted these files to NIfTI while preserving the original
voxel grid, spacing, affine information, and label datatypes. During conversion,
labels 181 and 182 were removed from the anatomical label maps, since they were
mostly outside the brain foreground and would otherwise distort the
overlap-based evaluation.

For each subject, I used the skull-stripped anatomical image in delineation space
together with its corresponding manual structure label map. I also generated a
binary brain mask from the nonzero foreground of the skull-stripped image. Thus,
each subject has an image, a mask, and a cleaned label map in the same space.

The benchmark is defined as an inter-patient monomodal registration task. I
generated all unordered subject pairs from the 40 LPBA40 subjects, resulting in
780 registration pairs.

As in the other benchmarks, the moving image and labels are first rigidly
prealigned to the fixed image, using nearest-neighbour interpolation for labels.
DIPY SyN and ANTs SyN are then run from the same prealigned inputs. Results are
evaluated using image-based metrics and overlap-based metrics, including Dice and
Jaccard between the warped moving labels and the fixed labels.

One of the main goals of this benchmark is to test whether the findings observed
in the previous `OASIS-2 <https://sites.wustl.edu/oasisbrains/home/oasis-2/>`_ experiments generalize to a different data distribution.
In OASIS-2, ANTs performed better than the current state of DIPY, while DIPY
became competitive or better after the changes collected in
`ants-syn-improvements <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/ants-syn-improvements>`_.
Interestingly, this behaviour was not reproduced on LPBA40: in the initial
100-pair run, DIPY already obtained better intensity-based metrics and slightly
better mean label overlap than ANTs, without applying those additional changes.

.. list-table:: Initial LPBA40 benchmark results over 100 inter-patient monomodal registration pairs. Values are reported as mean +/- standard deviation. Higher values are better, except for runtime.
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - NCC
     - NMI
     - Label Dice
     - Label Jaccard
     - Time (s)
   * - Baseline
     - 0.653 +/- 0.058
     - 1.051 +/- 0.010
     - 0.583 +/- 0.042
     - 0.421 +/- 0.040
     - --
   * - ANTs
     - 0.933 +/- 0.010
     - 1.157 +/- 0.012
     - 0.705 +/- 0.017
     - 0.551 +/- 0.019
     - **129.9 +/- 25.0**
   * - DIPY
     - **0.937 +/- 0.009**
     - **1.165 +/- 0.012**
     - **0.709 +/- 0.015**
     - **0.555 +/- 0.018**
     - 157.7 +/- 12.3

Multimodal MI Benchmarking
--------------------------

I also opened a new branch,
`mi-benchmarking <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/mi-benchmarking>`_,
which extends the previous benchmarking work with support for MI-based
registration experiments. This branch uses the ``single-loop-MI`` implementation
and will replace the older ``registration-benchmark`` branch for future
experiments.

For the initial multimodal tests, I used the MRBrainS18 dataset, downloaded from
`DataverseNL <https://dataverse.nl/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi\%3A10.34894\%2FE0U32Q>`_. Each subject includes FLAIR, IR, T1, and a manual
segmentation. I created a cleaned multimodal NIfTI folder containing
skull-stripped versions of these images, using the foreground mask defined by
``segm.nii.gz > 0``. The same segmentation is also used as the label map for
overlap-based evaluation.

Because modalities from the same subject are already aligned, the benchmark is
defined as an inter-patient task. I generated all unordered subject pairs and,
for each pair, all ordered cross-modality combinations among FLAIR, IR, and T1,
excluding same-modality pairs. With seven subjects, this gives 126
registration pairs.

The moving image and labels are first rigidly prealigned to the fixed image, after which DIPY SyN
and ANTs SyN are run from the same initialization. Results are evaluated with
image-based metrics and with Dice/Jaccard overlap between the warped moving
labels and the fixed labels.

For the initial 100-pair experiment using MI as the registration metric, the
behaviour differed from the LPBA40 monomodal benchmark: ANTs obtained slightly
better intensity-based metrics, while DIPY gave slightly better mean label
overlap.

.. list-table:: Initial multimodal MI benchmark results over 100 inter-patient cross-modality registration pairs from MRBrainS18.
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - NCC
     - NMI
     - Label Dice
     - Label Jaccard
     - Time (s)
   * - Baseline
     - 0.362 +/- 0.086
     - 1.021 +/- 0.006
     - 0.506 +/- 0.056
     - 0.369 +/- 0.051
     - --
   * - ANTs
     - **0.561 +/- 0.087**
     - **1.044 +/- 0.013**
     - 0.565 +/- 0.049
     - 0.430 +/- 0.046
     - **39.5 +/- 3.6**
   * - DIPY
     - 0.549 +/- 0.084
     - 1.043 +/- 0.012
     - **0.567 +/- 0.051**
     - **0.432 +/- 0.048**
     - 67.2 +/- 4.5

Time Bottlenecks
----------------

Profiling showed that a major metric-independent bottleneck in DIPY's SyN
implementation is the fixed-point inversion of displacement fields. Each SyN
optimization iteration computes four field inversions, and every inversion
performs several internal fixed-point iterations. In the original implementation, 
all these voxel-wise loops are executed serially.

A preliminary optimization is available in the
`speed-syn <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/speed-syn>`_ branch. It
introduces OpenMP parallelization through Cython's ``prange`` for the internal
displacement-field composition used by inversion, the computation of
residual-vector norms, and the update of the inverse displacement field. A ``num_threads`` parameter
was also added and propagated through ``SymmetricDiffeomorphicRegistration``.

This optimization does not modify the fixed-point inversion equations or the SyN
optimization algorithm. It only parallelizes independent voxel-wise operations
and is therefore applicable independently of the selected similarity metric.

.. list-table:: Preliminary SyN runtime comparison using the same input images and a multiresolution iteration schedule of 20, 20, 10.
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - Time (s)
     - NCC
   * - DIPY serial
     - 301.155
     - 0.95494
   * - DIPY threaded
     - 243.676
     - 0.95494
   * - ANTs
     - 195.268
     - 0.95765

Threading produced a 1.24x speed-up over serial DIPY. In this preliminary test,
serial and threaded DIPY required respectively 1.54x and 1.25x the ANTs execution
time.

Next Week's Work
----------------

Given the latest results, there does not seem to be a clear and consistent
accuracy improvement for DIPY across datasets. However, the experiments do
suggest a more consistent opportunity for improvement in terms of efficiency.
Based on this, next week's work will focus on:

- Continuing the benchmarking experiments, with the goal of better understanding
  when and why accuracy differences appear, and whether specific optimization
  choices can improve DIPY's performance.

- Preparing a PR focused on improving the runtime efficiency of DIPY's
  registration pipeline.

- Continuing work on the new MI PR, including the implementation of the sparse
  path if it becomes necessary.

- Looking for larger and more suitable datasets for multimodal registration
  benchmarking.

Find Me Online
--------------

- GitHub: `TomasGuija <https://github.com/TomasGuija>`_
- LinkedIn: `Tomás Guija Valiente <https://www.linkedin.com/in/tom%C3%A1s-guija-valiente-155180260/>`_

Thank you for reading!
