Sixth Coding Week: Profiling, Performance, and New Metric for Affine Registration
================================================================================

.. post:: July 6 2026
    :author: Tomas Guija-Valiente
    :tags: google
    :category: gsoc

Hello everyone!

This was the sixth coding week of my GSoC project with
`DIPY <https://github.com/dipy/dipy>`_. This week, I shifted my focus to
performance improvements and to the implementation of a new metric for affine
registration. In particular, my work focused on:

- Opening a small optimization PR for DIPY's Parzen-window MI histogram
  computation.
- Opening a PR to parallelize displacement-field composition in DIPY's
  registration backend.
- Adding a profiling script to measure where 3D SyN registration spends most of
  its time.
- Opening a draft PR adding local cross-correlation as a metric for DIPY's
  affine registration framework.

MI Small Fix
------------

In addition to the main Mutual Information (MI) work, I opened a small
optimization PR,
`PR #4071 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4071>`_, for DIPY's Parzen joint
histogram computation.

The issue is that the current implementation evaluates one extra histogram bin
that can never contribute to the cubic B-spline Parzen window. This does not
change the numerical result, since the contribution is always zero, but it adds
unnecessary work in both the probability-density and gradient computations.

The PR updates the loop so that only the four bins that can actually contribute
are evaluated. It also makes the padding logic clearer by reusing the existing
``padding`` variable instead of relying on hardcoded values.

To confirm the change, I added debug counters to the original implementation and
checked the redundant bin during a real MI run. Its contribution was always
exactly zero, which confirmed that the simplification preserves the original
result while avoiding unnecessary computation.

Field Composition Threading
---------------------------

Last week I introduced the
`speed-syn <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/speed-syn>`_ branch, which
explored OpenMP-based threading for parts of DIPY's SyN registration pipeline.
This week I continued that work and opened it as a ready pull request:
`PR #4073 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4073>`_.

The PR focuses on displacement-field composition, an operation that is called
repeatedly during SyN registration and can become expensive in 3D. The change
keeps the original computation unchanged, but parallelizes independent parts of
the loop using Cython's ``prange``.

I also added tests comparing one-thread and multi-thread executions for both 2D
and 3D fields. These tests check that the threaded version produces the same
composed fields and the same composition statistics as the single-thread
reference.

Overall, this PR turns the previous ``speed-syn`` prototype into a smaller and
more focused contribution aimed at improving the runtime of DIPY's registration
backend without changing the registration algorithm itself.

Profiling 3D SyN
----------------

To evaluate the effect of the field-composition changes, I added a small
profiling script in the
`profiling-syn <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/profiling-syn>`_
branch. The goal of this script is not to provide a full benchmark, but to
identify which parts of the 3D SyN registration pipeline dominate the runtime.

The script runs a 3D SyN registration using DIPY's standard
``SymmetricDiffeomorphicRegistration`` class with the ``CCMetric``. When no input
images are provided, it uses the same example data as DIPY's 3D SyN example: the
Stanford HARDI b0 volume as the fixed image and the synthetic b0 image as the
moving image.

The registration call is wrapped with Python's ``cProfile`` module, producing a
``.prof`` file that can later be inspected with ``pstats``. Since the functions
of interest are implemented in Cython, I also enabled Cython-level profiling in
the relevant ``.pyx`` files with ``# cython: profile=True``. Without this
directive, ``cProfile`` can show the Python-level call stack, but gives much less
useful information about time spent inside individual Cython functions.

The profiling results show that the threading change substantially reduces the
cost of field composition.

.. list-table:: Profiling results for ``compose_vector_fields_3d`` before and after the threading change.
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Version
     - Calls
     - Internal time (s)
     - Profiled runtime share
   * - Before threading
     - 55
     - 1.36
     - 28%
   * - After threading
     - 55
     - 0.27
     - 4%

The same function was called 55 times in both runs, but its internal time dropped
from approximately 1.36 seconds to 0.27 seconds. This corresponds to an
approximate 5.1x speed-up for ``compose_vector_fields_3d`` itself.

Affine Cross-Correlation Registration
-------------------------------------

This week I opened a new draft PR,
`PR #4078 <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4078>`_, adding local
cross-correlation as a metric for DIPY's affine registration framework. The goal
is to provide an affine registration metric better suited to monomodal
registration problems, where local normalized cross-correlation is often more
appropriate than mutual information.

Until now, DIPY's affine registration framework provided mutual information as
the main metric available through the object-oriented affine registration API.
The new implementation introduces a ``CrossCorrelationMetric`` class under
``imaffine``, following the same optimizer-facing structure as the existing
``MutualInformationMetric``. In particular, the new metric implements the same
core methods expected by ``AffineRegistration``: ``setup``, ``distance``,
``gradient``, and ``distance_and_gradient``.

The implementation was designed to remain as close as possible to the existing
DIPY registration code. On the Cython side, it reuses the local
cross-correlation factors computed in ``crosscorr.pyx``, as well as the same
negative-energy convention used by the SyN cross-correlation path. The
affine-specific part consists of projecting the local cross-correlation
image-space gradient onto the affine transform parameters using the transform
Jacobian.

As a first smoke test, I followed the structure of DIPY's existing 3D affine
registration example. I registered the Stanford HARDI b0 volume against the SyN
b0 sample volume, both downloaded through DIPY. This provides a monomodal test
case, since both images are b0 MRI volumes. The registration was initialized with
center-of-mass alignment and then refined with translation, rigid, and affine
stages using the new cross-correlation metric.

.. list-table:: Global normalized cross-correlation across the affine registration pipeline. Higher values are better.
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Stage
     - Global NCC
   * - Identity / pre-registration
     - 0.190317
   * - Center of mass
     - 0.477166
   * - Translation CC
     - 0.558438
   * - Rigid CC
     - 0.665606
   * - Affine CC
     - **0.675099**

These results suggest that the new metric is able to drive affine registration
and improve alignment on the tested DIPY sample data. The next step is to add
proper automated tests, including a small controlled registration case and, if
possible, a finite-difference check of the affine gradient.

Next Week's Work
----------------

For next week, I plan to focus on two main tasks:

- Improve the test coverage for the affine cross-correlation implementation.

- Continue investigating possible efficiency improvements for DIPY's
  registration pipeline, with a particular focus on understanding the relevance
  of the 2018 OpenMP PRs and identifying which parts of that work can still be
  useful for the current implementation.

Find Me Online
--------------

- GitHub: `TomasGuija <https://github.com/TomasGuija>`_
- LinkedIn: `Tomás Guija Valiente <https://www.linkedin.com/in/tom%C3%A1s-guija-valiente-155180260/>`_

Thank you for reading!