Third Coding Week: MI testing and Benchmarking
============================================

.. post:: June 15 2026
    :author: Tomas Guija-Valiente
    :tags: google
    :category: gsoc

Hello everyone! 

I'm almost halfway there now, with the midterm evaluation very close for short projects, so 
it is time to focus. In this new blog post I will make a summary of my work on the third Coding Period week. 
Overall, my work focused on: 

- Further testing my first SyN-compatible MI metric implementation for `DIPY <https://github.com/dipy/dipy>`_.
- Continuing the development of the registration benchmarking pipeline, with a particular focus on preparing a cluster-based
  large-scale experiment to make future runs faster, more reproducible and easier to analyze. 
- Updating the `SynthSeg brain-mask PR <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4052>`_.


MI for SyN: preliminar results
------------------------------

Following last week's work, I now tried my own MI implementation (developed under 
`double-loop-MI <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/double-loop-MI>`_) on real data. 

Overall, the implementation seems to be working. The scalar MI values match `ITK <https://github.com/InsightSoftwareConsortium/ITK>`_, although the dense
derivative fields are not numerically identical on real images. The main preliminary observations are the following: 

- I first compared the dense derivative fields computed by DIPY and ITK. Following last week's setup for toy examples, 
  I used two already skull-stripped images from the same subject, initialized both MI metrics at the identity transform, and
  computed one single dense derivative step. Depending on crop size, the cosine similarity between the derivative fields varied. 
  However, I do not think that getting unequal results means the new implementation must be incorrect. The differences may be due to several
  implementation details, such as image-gradient conventions, boundary handling, interpolation details etc.
- I also ran a single fixed-moving image pair from the `OASIS 2 <https://sites.wustl.edu/oasisbrains/home/oasis-2/>`_ dataset, using
  the same general benchmarking pipeline as before. The resulting metrics are shown on the following table:
  
  .. list-table:: Preliminary results for one OASIS2 fixed--moving pair using MI-SyN.
    :name: tab-oasis2-mi-syn-results
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Method
      - NCC ↑
      - NMI ↑
      - Brain Dice ↑
      - Brain Jaccard ↑
      - Label Dice ↑
      - Label Jaccard ↑
    * - Baseline
      - 0.9242
      - 1.1691
      - 0.9848
      - 0.9701
      - 0.8938
      - 0.8102
    * - **ANTs MI-SyN**
      - **0.9441**
      - **1.1862**
      - **0.9905**
      - **0.9812**
      - **0.8966**
      - **0.8144**
    * - DIPY MI-SyN
      - 0.9423
      - 1.1830
      - 0.9894
      - 0.9790
      - 0.8946
      - 0.8113

As shown in the table above, the current implementation seems to be working properly, but results are slightly worse than those obtained with 
`ANTs <https://github.com/ANTsX/ANTsPy>`_. Further benchmarking will be needed to determine whether those differences come trom the MI implementation itself or from other
optimization differences between both frameworks. 

Benchmarking
------------

The cluster benchmarking work is carried out under the
`registration-benchmark <https://github.com/TomasGuija/dipy/tree/registration-benchmark>`_
branch. A small SLURM layer was added around the existing registration benchmark
code, without changing the benchmarking logic itself.

The cluster workflow uses a SLURM job array, where each task processes one
fixed--moving image pair from the benchmark CSV file. The array index is provided
by SLURM through ``SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`` and passed to the benchmark script as
``--pair-index``. For example:

.. code-block:: bash

   sbatch --array=0-9 benchmarks/registration/cluster/slurm_pair_job.sh

This launches ten independent benchmark jobs, one for each pair index from 0 to
9. The same script can be reused for different datasets and configurations by
setting environment variables such as ``BENCHMARK_PAIRS``, ``BENCHMARK_CONFIG``,
``BENCHMARK_OUT``, ``DOWNSAMPLE_FACTOR``, and ``USE_CUDA``. GPU execution can be
requested with ``--gres=gpu:1``, while CPU execution simply omits this option and
sets ``USE_CUDA=0``.

Each array task writes separate ``.out`` and ``.err`` files using the SLURM job
and task identifiers, making failed samples easy to inspect independently. Once
the jobs finish, ``collect_results.py`` scans the output directory and aggregates
the per-pair results into a single summary JSON file.

.. list-table:: Mean benchmark metrics across 10 OASIS-2 registration pairs.
   :name: tab-oasis2-benchmark
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - NCC ↑
     - NMI ↑
     - Whole Dice ↑
     - Whole Jaccard ↑
     - Label Dice ↑
     - Label Jaccard ↑
   * - Baseline
     - 0.9443
     - 1.1897
     - 0.9912
     - 0.9826
     - 0.9228
     - 0.8588
   * - **ANTs**
     - **0.9560**
     - **1.2074**
     - **0.9936**
     - **0.9872**
     - **0.9230**
     - **0.8591**
   * - DIPY
     - 0.9528
     - 1.2009
     - 0.9925
     - 0.9852
     - 0.9213
     - 0.8563

As shown in the table above, ANTs obtains slightly better overall
results. This suggests that the differences observed previously may not be caused
by the MI implementation alone, but could also be related to other
optimization-related differences.

SynthSeg PR
-----------

The `SynthSeg brain mask PR <https://github.com/dipy/dipy/pull/4052>`_ was
updated following the discussion from the last meeting. The ``predict`` method now
includes an explicit ``return_masks`` flag, so mask generation is optional.

By default, masks are not returned, preserving the original prediction output.
When ``return_masks=True``, the method returns the corresponding brain masks
after applying the existing ``remove_holes_and_islands`` post-processing step. A
warning is also raised to inform users that the final post-processed mask may
include voxels originally predicted as background by the model.

What's Next?
------------

Next week's work will focus on two main directions:

* Running the benchmark under different experimental conditions to better
  understand the differences between the DIPY and ANTs SyN implementations. This
  will also include merging the MI double-loop branch with the
  ``registration-benchmark`` branch, so that the current MI implementation can be
  tested within the benchmark workflow.

* Continuing the MI implementation for DIPY, with the next step being the removal
  of the double loop to improve runtime performance while keeping the optimized
  version numerically close to the current implementation.

Find Me Online
--------------

- GitHub: `TomasGuija <https://github.com/TomasGuija>`_
- LinkedIn: `Tomás Guija Valiente <https://www.linkedin.com/in/tom%C3%A1s-guija-valiente-155180260/>`_

Thank you for reading!