====================================
Happy 2025 with DIPY 1.10.0 is out!
====================================

:date: 2024-12-12
:author: Eleftherios Garyfallidis
:category: Release

Hello and Happy 2025 to all! 

We are excited to announce a new release of DIPY: DIPY 1.10.0! 
The release 1.10.0 received contributions from 28 developers. We closed 258 issues and merged 187 pull requests.

Highlights of 1.10.0 release include:
=====================================

* **NF: Patch2Self3** - Memory less denoising for dMRI is now available.
* **NF: Fiber density and spread** from ODF using Bingham distributions method added.
* **NF: Iteratively reweighted least squares** for robust fitting of diffusion models added.
* **NF: NDC** - Neighboring DWI Correlation quality metric added.
* **NF: DAM** - DWI-based tissue classification method added.
* **Parallel Backends:** New support for Ray, Joblib, and Dask for fitting reconstruction.
* **RF:** Deprecation of Tensorflow support; PyTorch is now the default.
* **Style:** Adoption of ruff for automatic style enforcement and transition to f-strings.

Installation
============

To upgrade or install DIPY, run:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install --upgrade dipy

This version depends on nibabel (3.0.0+) and FURY (0.12.0+) for visualization.

Announcements
=============

Registration for the online **DIPY workshop 2025 (March 17-21)** is open! 
The workshop will equip you with the skills and knowledge needed to master the latest techniques in structural and diffusion imaging. 
See the program and `register here <https://workshop.dipy.org>`_.

Please support us by citing DIPY in your papers using the following DOI: `10.3389/fninf.2014.00008 <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24600385>`_.
